Śrī Gīti Alala Ho
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Śrī gīti! Alala ho!
Form of glorious mastery of great bliss,
With your splendorous wisdom mudrā,
Ablaze with brilliant rays of constant joy,
You course throughout the three domains. 
Splendid in your perfect vajra discipline,
Bound with the mudrā of changelessness,
You proclaim the blissful song of A-haṃ.
Intoxicated with the nectar of non-duality,
Supreme, unchanging, great adept—hoḥ! 
Although never parting from a single essence,
You adopt the appearance of a heruka’s form,
Make offerings throughout the three worlds,
And, in the manner of a great heroic warrior,
Subdue and conquer both saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. 
With the sword that vanquishes the māras,
The bow and arrow of means and wisdom,
And other vajra armaments and weaponry,
You strike terror into the demonic hordes—
Glorious herukas, fearsome and magnificent. 
When your awesome speech, majestic body,
And wrathful mind of peaceful compassion
Enter and inspire an ordinary human form,
All fears of this dark age are thereby overcome. 
As the wisdom form, which is naturally arisen,
Pervades the whole world and its inhabitants,
Like base metal that’s transmuted into gold,
All and everything becomes the deity’s form.
Wondrous, magical, conqueror of great bliss,
Chief of the maṇḍala, to you I pay homage. 
Ema! Ema! O magnificent vajra,
Vajra sovereign in all your splendour,
Accomplisher of all the buddhas’ activity,
Perform your timely and illusory dance! 
Aho!
Ema kiri kiri malya śabda pataye gīti ma a haṃ 
This arose spontaneously through the blessings of the accomplished vidyādharas on the 29th day of the 12th month of the Water Dragon year. 
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2023.
Bibliography
Tibetan Editions
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. gsung 'bum/_'jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros/ (dbu med/). 8 vols. Gangtok: Dzongsar Khyentse Labrang, 1981–1985. (BDRC W21813) Vol. 3: 69–70
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 8: 459–460
Version: 1.0-20230605