Song Written on the Seventeenth Day of the Miracle Month
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö
Homage to the sovereign gurus! 
Let the mind of this beggar turn toward the Dharma.
This character of mine is just like a lump of iron.
I don’t consider impermanence or renunciation at all. 
Although I wish to develop altruistic intentions,
This is spoiled by the constraints of selfishness.
Although I have received countless empowerments,
I wander from the path of generation and completion.
I’m caught up in clinging to ordinary appearances,
Trapped in the confines of conceptual apprehension. 
Although I aspire towards Mahāmudrā and Dzogchen,
Day and night, I am distracted by ordinary thinking.
As the fluctuations of thoughts and ideas increase,
I’m enclosed within the cocoon of dualistic grasping. 
Trust in the kind, glorious protector-guru,
Comes to me but intermittently.
Although the real buddha is said to dwell within,
Veils of negative karma prevent my seeing him.
This is what comes of having meagre devotion. 
In the past I lived in a state of comfort,
But now I’ve secured my own misery.
As I consider the prospect of married life,[1]
How frustrating and miserable it seems. 
There’s no avoiding the consequences of one’s own actions.
They can cause sorrow in this life and sorrow in the next.
Now is the time to experience the result that is suffering.
The mere thought of this makes my heart tremble and quiver.
Although it will come to pass, there is nothing to be done! 
Now, I call out to you, O guru and Three Jewels,
In heartfelt prayer and plant the stake of devotion:
May you watch over and care for me! 
Do not permit me, the child-like, to succumb to evil action.
Cause my mind to turn towards the Dharma.
Let all that I do be of benefit to others.
Make all my connections—physical, vocal and mental—meaningful. 
May I fulfil the intentions of the father-guru
And contribute to Lord Khyentse’s activity![2] 
Written on the seventeenth day of the Month of Miracles in a year of the Ox.
| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön Sogyal Trust, 2023.
Bibliography
Tibetan Editions
'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "cho 'phrul zla ba'i tshes bcu bdun la bris pa'i mgur/" In 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung 'bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. (W1KG12986) Vol. 8: 485–486
Version: 1.0-20230607


The translation of this line is tentative.  ↩

This line is ambiguous. Khyentse (mkhyen brtse) here could be read either as a personal name, referring to Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo ('jam dbyangs mkhyen brtse'i dbang po, 1820–1892), or more generally as a pair of adjectives meaning 'wise and loving'.  ↩